This is going to be your personal opinion, but I'm
trying to build up a consensus, if there is one, by
adding up personal opinion. What do you think the
taxpayers and the general public in this country
think of planetary astronomy in particular and
just astronomy in general? I think the public's
very interested in astronomy. And to the average
person on the street, planetary astronomy is
probably most of astronomy. I mean, they've heard
a lot from Sagan, which emphasizes, although not
exclusively, planetary astronomy. And they see
stuff in the media frequently on sexy things like
black holes, but they don't understand them. On
the other hand, if you show them a picture of
Jupiter or a satellite of the outer solar system or
a volcano on Mars, they'll figure out quite
quickly where it was, how that image was obtained,
and maybe in some cases be able to tell you why
they'd like to see more. So I think, in fact, it's
extremely important for science in this country
to continue the planetary program with vigor. Do
you think the public ought to have that view? Sure.
Why not? It doesn't matter. It's close. It's
easier to touch. You can see Jupiter at night and
recognize it. To point out to your kids that it's
not just a star, but it's a big, giant, gaseous
world with little planets around it. Why not?
Here's another two-part question. And your
viewpoint is probably fairly important here. Do
you think planetary astronomers have done a good
job of selling themselves to the public and
Congress? And do you think that astronomers as a
whole have done a good job doing that? It's hard to
answer. The second one I can answer, recently I
think there's been some counter examples or
examples of negative salesmanship, bickering,
to Congress trying to go pork and anti-pork for
things like the Gemini project, probably quite
counterproductive. So politicizing future
projects with NSF and NASA as the funding agency is
probably a bad idea. As far as planetary astronomy
being successful, well, you'd like to think so. On
the other hand, look at the number of missions
planned and canceled of late. So in fact, from that
aspect, despite the fact that these things are
moderately inexpensive compared to manned
exploration of near Earth environment or
anything else. They aren't getting full funding.
It's just a tough time for space science, I
suppose. We've both done some optical and some
radio astronomy.
First of all, radio astronomy never had a sneering
attitude towards planetary work. Now, is this
just because the planets were bright sources that
could be identified? Or was it because both of them
in the 50s had this pariah status? Well, I'm not
sure the radio astronomers had pariah status.
They were just regarded as different, because
their backgrounds weren't as enough. They were
engineers, and they certainly knew how to use
slide rule. some electronic test equipment.
Soldering iron. It's definitely a soldering iron
and plenty of solder. I wasn't completely
scorned. I don't know. No, I think they were
treated differently. They may have been not
mainstream, but I don't think they were
particularly pariahs. And as far as planetary
astronomy making an impact, as soon as Jupiter was
just slightly beyond discovered at low frequency
from the first radiation by Franklin and Burke,
right? Then Venus got detected, I think, in 56 or 57
first. No one believed it quite that fast. With a
high brightness temperature. And after a little
while, we realized that that wouldn't go away. And
you had to figure out what the reason was. So that
played a big role around 1960, plus or minus three
on each side of 1960, in the development of
planetary physics. How come with this future
planning and tenure plans and all this sort of
stuff, the radio astronomers always seem to have
their fights and their bloodlettings behind
locked doors and come out with a unified thing,
whereas the optical people stage public
spectacles? Why does this always continue? I
mean, I've heard this repeated many times. I don't
know the answer. I mean, it's a sensible part of
science to disagree on technical details. That's
normal. but you're not supposed to involve
Congress in it. Which doesn't understand the
technical details in general. Definitely not,
and probably doesn't care. And once they hear some
argument, they figure, oh, both of these sides are
quite silly, and let's listen to them for a few
minutes and go on to something more serious. Yeah,
I don't know the answer to that, but it does seem to
always be the case. I would have thought we'd got
over that 10 years ago. I mean, even the
high-energy physicists have gotten their act
together, which with that bunch of, Queen Bee
seems incredible.
Yeah, I don't know how black and white the
situation is. I'm pretty unplugged to that. But
certainly, ever since I got to think about
astropolitics, it's always been the case that the
radio astronomers have been well enough prepared
in advance that they had a chance to get something
while the optical folks bit and scratched, mostly
scratched each other pretty badly. Now with some
exceptions, I mean the National Observatory in
the early days at least went quickly from an 0.9 to a
2.1 to 2.4 meter telescopes, but after that it's
pretty much turned off. Planetary
Astronomies found out a lot of things about the
solar system in the last 30 years. All you have to do
is compare Baker's 7th edition or something like
that and it's just a whole different solar system.
Do you think that's really changed the way the
general public thinks about anything? I've got a
whole list here, the way they've thought about
Earth, solar system, the universe, planetary
astronomy, astronomy. Can you be more explicit? I
mean, give me an example. Has it really changed the
way
people think about, well, for example, science?
Do you think that all these discoveries have made
people say, hey, these scientists can really do
something. They can really find out stuff. I think
they've thought that that's the case. since World
War II. I think the application of science to the
conflict, World War II and the Cold War, told
people that science was important, if not
necessarily completely without
disqualification or sin. There's been a lot of, I
don't know if you want to call it
pseudo-philosophical comments to the effect
that now that we can get out and see that Earth is
just one little planet among others and all this
sort of stuff. Do you think that's really affected
the general public?
Slightly from the ecological point of view, but
not enormously. I think the lumber companies are
still quite happy to cut all the old growth and the
owls be damned.
OK. 30 years ago, there was still a chance that
there was life on Mars. And now we've been to all the
major planets except Pluto, and no evidence so far
of any life on any planet, particularly no little
green men on Mars, not even a bug. Do you think
that's had any effect on funding and public
interest for planetary astronomy, astronomy,
and science in general? I don't think so. I don't
think so. Anyway, we haven't explored Jupiter
thoroughly, right? I mean, there's still
possibilities for floaters. The alternative is
if they would have found one microbe on Mars. We'd
be standing there now probably. That's true. I
mean, certainly if the results had been very, very
different from Viking's more or less negative
results, that we'd want to track it down or
certainly make sure it wasn't something we
carried along. Yep, hitchhikers are welcome.
Yes, I agree with what you're saying. But I don't
think it's had an enormously negative effect,
because I think most people are slightly cynical
and didn't really expect to see much. It would have
been interesting if they had found fossils. Hard
to do experiments on. We don't know that. We still
may. Of course, the only two lander probes were
landed for engineering reasons. Absolutely.
They're lousy places to look for anything
interesting because they don't have previous
water flow history. Now, unfortunately, this
question that I that I wrote down here. It says your
institution, but Lick is now separate from
Berkeley, but isn't in all the states. Lick is a
statewide institution, per se. It's called
Organized Research Unit, and it serves all
campuses. Well, then let's just take Berkeley
here. You mentioned how Carl came here for a while
and got interest started. And you still have some
interest in planetary astronomy. Do you have any
planetary astronomy group here or anything like
that? Not really a group, but Imke de Potter is very
interested and works almost full-time on
planetary problems, radio mostly, radio
magnetospheres, radio thermal radiation from
all the planets. She's had a student who just
finished a thesis on the thermal radiation from
Mercury as measured radio interferometry. So
there's a bit going on. Also, the geology
department would like to be in it. They're not
quite sure how to do that. So there's interest in
geology, but nothing much yet to show for it. How
come this place never developed a strong
planetary things. Other things? Just breaks of
the game. A lot of strong people in other fields.
It's hard to cover every base. We don't have much in
solar. But never any implied attitude that you
shouldn't do that? No. What do you think the
taxpayers got out of the money they funneled into
the space program over there? the past 30 years of
planetary astronomy? Oh, a lot. A lot, because
it's a wonderful frontier. More in planetary,
more tangible stuff in planetary than anything
else. And we can point to moon rocks and say, hey, if
you're interested, we'll tell you how old that
rock is. That rock is older than anything you
walked on. Probably. Probably. So, yeah, I think
they've done reasonably well. I mean, you know,
it's hard to justify the bucks for a launch, but
what can you do? I think they've gotten a lot of
thrills, too. You think planetary astronomy is a
real... accepted now by most other astronomers?
Most. Most. Still a few hold out. Maybe. Not that
many. But, you know, I don't like all kinds of
astronomy. Some of mine knows that, but there's
some things I wouldn't bother to do. A lot of people
have been getting a lot of mileage lately in the,
quote, planetary, unquote, field. I just wrote
down four things here. There might be more. One is
the search for extraterrestrial intelligence.
One is search for other solar systems. Another one
is the hole in Earth's ozone layer, and one finding
and deflecting killer asteroids and comets. So
you think they've overdone that? Well, not that
much. I mean, the ozone hole is real, right? So you
hardly want to see your grandchildren have to wear
a Dodger hat every time they go out in the sun in 20
years. So that's something that clearly is a
man-made situation, which can be probably
improved by ecological care in the future. So
that's probably, obviously, the most important
thing. SETI is the most whimsical, but still has a
small outside chance of success. And there, of
course, the stakes are very large. So it's like a
lottery. And that would be exciting. And I'd be
somewhat cynical about the chances for instant
success. But who knows? Killer asteroids? The
statistics are fairly straightforward that
there are asteroid impacts that are going to
release a lot of kinetic energy. Certainly going
to ruin the Tuesday tea party. Yeah. Right. So
that's fine whether you can deflect them or want to
deflect them if you knew enough how to do that. This
is a different constituency, which might not be my
favorite fans. Other solar systems are... likely
events, and we don't quite know how to find them.
When you find a dust cloud around Beta Pictoris,
that's fine. Whether that really has anything to
do with another solar system is unknown, but it's a
kind of lead we would like to follow up in a variety
of ways. So looking, for example, for objects of
few Jovian masses by regular velocities of the
apparent star are projects going on now which are
quite worthwhile and don't tap the resources very
deeply. should continue, and the chances of
success are hard to measure, but probably pretty
good. Here's a question, and I think you can put
them together, because both planetary
astronomers and regular astronomers are
complaining about the budget crunch. But of
course, there's even now vastly more money per
astronomer available than there was in the late
1950s, right? Yeah, because then there wasn't
any. We learned to do without. But that wasn't so
good. I mean, use it up, wear it out, make it do. We
learned that. And that's not necessarily the most
efficient way to proceed. It does make you
self-reliant. But what do you think about, and
I'll lump together planetary astronomy with
astronomy, because if somebody pulls the plug in
the bathtub, all the little rubber duckies are
going to ground.
What's the state of it today? Plateau? Seems like a
plateau, but the problem is The number of people
who want money are increasing, and expectations
are increasing sort of proportional to the
prospects in the field, which are good. So it's a
disappointment in the sense that our
expectations get higher all the time. So the
exponent is greater than one. Yeah, I think so.
And, well, would you agree that it just can't keep
increasing at the rate it's been doing, say,
during the 70s or during the 60s? Yeah, there it was
very high. But it could increase a little bit, keep
us from fighting among ourselves all the time for
the remaining scraps. There are more
degree-granting institutions than ever, and
more new PhDs than ever. How long can that go on? Not
forever. We've got more than we need. Right. I
mean, you just can't employ them all game through.
Also, there's a rather substantial influx of
astronomers from other fields. So it isn't just
that we're training too many PhDs, but the field is
successful. The numbers I've heard quoted around
recently is something like 135, roughly, PhDs per
year in astronomy. And there aren't nearly that
many positions. So they often go into postdocs as a
holding position for some years. On the other
hand, the number of people calling themselves
astronomers or becoming members of AAS increases
at about twice that rate. So it must mean an influx
from physics and other associated fields. So even
if we were to cut back enormously in productivity
new PhDs, it wouldn't completely solve the
problem.
We forgot to go into some detail about Gerard de
Bacallure, who was unusual in that he did
planetary and galaxy research. Right. He walked
both sides of the street in a very unusual way in the
1950s, 60s, and even later. He was a good advocate
of planetary astronomy. Wrote a good book on Mars,
which was distillation of many observations. Not
all of them survived, but it was influential. And
he did very good stuff on galaxies, probably was
one of the leader in statistical work on galaxy
properties from Hubble's death to maybe 1970.
Quite an impressive guy to be able to do that that
well. So I shouldn't have omitted him earlier, but
certainly he was a well-respected person that
could do either. Well, we just noticed that when
you applied for telescope time at McDonald in
early 1963, de Bacalhau wrote you a letter dated
February 4, 1963, in which he said there's a good
possibility of JPL buying time at McDonald
Observatory. And he sounded quite favorable on
that. Right. So I'm not sure what happened next.
Obviously, it never panned out. It was never a
penny spent. He recommends that you send a formal
application to Dr. W.W. Morgan at Yerkes
Observatory. And then here's the next letter
saying, in a famous phrase we both remember, a
famous sentence, I regret to have to inform you
that the observing program for the McDonnell
82-inch is saturated.
And I would have supposed that you would have made
arrangements through Caltech to obtain
observing time locally. These were very
frustrating times. It's interesting that Morgan
actually was a nicer guy than I thought at the time.
So I don't think he was particularly mad at me. It's
interesting that just a year and a half later,
McDonald completely opened up to planetary work.
Yes, right, but it wasn't because of either of
those people, although DeVocalor certainly
wouldn't have minded. No, that was Smitty's
influence, which had an enormous positive change
there.